51

9
 CHAPTER 9 
 MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS 
 The effectiveness of Project Risk Management depends upon the way the approved plans are carried out. 
These plans should be executed correctly, reviewed, and updated regularly. If this is carried out correctly, the 
invested effort will be rewarded and future projects will beneﬁ t from this project’s experience. 
 9.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Monitor and Control Risks Process 
 The primary objectives of risk monitoring and controlling are to track identiﬁ ed risks, monitor residual risks, 
identify new risks, ensure that risk response plans are executed at the appropriate time, and evaluate their 
effectiveness throughout the project life cycle. 
 In addition to tracking and managing the risk response actions, the effectiveness of all of the Project 
Risk Management processes should be reviewed to provide improvements to the management of the current 
project as well as future ones. 
 For each risk or set of risks for which a contingent response has been deﬁ ned, the corresponding set of 
trigger conditions should have been speciﬁ ed. It is the responsibility of the action owner to ensure that these 
conditions are effectively monitored and that the corresponding actions are carried out as deﬁ ned, in a timely 
manner. 
 Once the Plan Risk Responses process is complete, all of the approved unconditional response actions 
should have been included and deﬁ ned in the current project management plan. The ﬁ rst action of risk 
monitoring and controlling is to check whether this is the case and take any appropriate action if necessary, 
such as invoking the change management process with respect to any missing actions. This will then ensure 
that the agreed-upon actions are carried out within the normal project execution framework. 
 The risk owners and risk action owners need to be briefed on any changes that may affect their 
responsibilities. Effective communication needs to be maintained between them and the project manager so 
that the designated stakeholders accept accountability for controlling the potential outcomes of speciﬁ c risks, 
apply their best efforts to track the associated trigger conditions and carry out the agreed-upon responses in 
a timely manner. 
 In addition to the response actions and trigger conditions, a mechanism for measuring the effectiveness 
of the response is provided by the Plan Risk Responses process. The risk action owner should keep the risk 
owner aware of the status of the response actions so that the risk owner can decide when the risk has been 
effectively dealt with, or whether additional actions need to be planned and implemented. 
52

9
CHAPTER 9 − MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS
 As the project progresses, additional information becomes available and the project environment may 
change as some risks occur, whether foreseen or unforeseen, and others become or cease to be relevant. 
The planning should therefore be kept current and the project manager should ensure that periodic risk 
reassessment, including risk identiﬁ cation, analysis, and response planning, is repeated at reasonable intervals, 
or in response to project events—without generating excessive administrative overhead. Typical reasons for 
risk reassessment are: 
 Occurrence of a major or unexpected risk, 
• 
 Need to analyze a complex change request, 
• 
 Phase end review, 
• 
 Project re-planning or major plan elaboration, and 
• 
 Periodic review to ensure that the information remains current. 
• 
 In the event of major organizational changes, risk management planning may need to be revisited prior to 
reassessing the risks. 
 In addition to the regular status reviews, periodic audits should be performed to determine strengths and 
weaknesses in handling risks within the project. This should entail identifying any barriers to effectiveness or 
keys to success in risk management, recognition of which could lead to improvements in risk management of 
the current or future projects. 
 At the end of the project, an integrated analysis of the risk management process should be carried out 
with a focus on long-term process improvements. This analysis consolidates the ﬁ ndings of the periodic 
audits to identify lessons that would be applicable in general to a large proportion of the organization’s 
projects in the future, such as appropriate levels of resources, adequate time for the analysis, use of tools, 
level of detail, etc. 
 At project closure, the project manager should ensure that a description has been given of the closure of 
every risk in the risk register, for example: (a) did not occur; (b) occurred and contingency plan invoked; or (c) 
occurred and impact to the project scope (i.e., time, cost, and quality). 
 The output of the audit of the risk management process should be consolidated with speciﬁ c information 
with respect to the project’s experience of risks, and any generally applicable guidelines for the organization 
should be highlighted and potential actions proposed for applying them. This can lead to an update to the 
corresponding organizational process assets. 
 An overview of the steps involved in the Monitor and Control Risks process is given in Figure 9-1. 
 
53

9
CHAPTER 9 − MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS
 Figure 9-1. Schematic Representation of the Monitor and Control Risks Process 
 9.2 Critical Success Factors for the Monitor and Control Risks Process 
 Critical success factors relate to maintaining risk awareness throughout the project and include the 
characteristics and capabilities detailed in Sections 9.2.1 through 9.2.3. 
 9.2.1 Integrate Risk Monitoring and Control with Project Monitoring and Control 
 From the start, the project management plan should include the actions required to monitor and control 
project risk. This should be set up early in the project planning cycle, and then adjusted in view of the risk 
response planning decisions adding, for example, the actions associated with monitoring speciﬁ c conditions 
or metrics. Once risk response planning has been carried out, the project schedule should include all of the 
agreed-upon, response-related actions so that they can be carried out as a normal part of project execution 
and tracked accordingly. 
54

9
CHAPTER 9 − MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS
 9.2.2 Continuously Monitor Risk Trigger Conditions 
 Risk response planning will have deﬁ ned a set of actions to be carried out as part of the project schedule 
as well as actions whose execution is dependent on a predeﬁ ned trigger condition. Checking for speciﬁ cally 
deﬁ ned risks that may trigger conditional responses is the responsibility of the risk action owner, in close 
collaboration with the risk owner under the overall authority of the project manager. 
 9.2.3 Maintain Risk Awareness 
 Risk management reports should be a regular item on every status meeting agenda to ensure that all team 
members remain aware of the importance of risk management and to ensure that it is fully integrated into all 
of the project management decisions. 
 The project’s senior-level sponsor should require regular reports on the risks and the planned responses 
to ensure that stakeholders are aware of the importance of keeping a focus on risk. Sponsor feedback also 
motivates the project team by demonstrating senior-level interest in Project Risk Management. 
 Stakeholders’ perception of the effectiveness of risk management is conditioned in part by the way in 
which risks are handled as they occur, and by the number or characteristics of such events. It is therefore 
crucial, whenever a risk occurs, that information about the event, as well as the progress and effectiveness of 
the responses, be communicated at regular intervals and in an honest manner adapted to the needs of each 
stakeholder. This should be supported by a well-executed communications plan. 
 9.3 Tools and Techniques for the Monitor and Control Risks Process 
 In addition to standard project management monitoring and control capabilities, risk monitoring and 
controlling requires a focus on the tools which will support its key success factors for tracking overall risk as 
well as individual risks. 
 9.3.1 Managing Contingency Reserves 
 Reserves may have been allocated separately to cover time-related and cost-related risks. Techniques 
are required that allow the project manager to assess at any point in the project whether these provide the 
required level of conﬁ dence in the success of the project. 
 Tools for managing time buffers should be closely integrated into the project’s scheduling techniques, 
whereas those for managing cost should be compatible with the ﬁ nancial practices. Tools are required to 
identify trends and forecast future outcomes to determine whether the reserves will remain sufﬁ cient. Tools 
are also required for tracking progress and spending in a consolidated manner. 
55

9
CHAPTER 9 − MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS
 9.3.2 Tracking Trigger Conditions 
 Trigger conditions and the corresponding metrics are deﬁ ned during the Plan Risk Responses process. 
Tools are required to evaluate and track these conditions against the project baseline or speciﬁ ed thresholds, 
based on actual status. They can be chosen to provide information on risks related to the deliverables, such as 
performance, as well as on project-related features, such as time and cost. 
 9.3.3 Tracking Overall Risk 
 Tools are required in order to determine, as the project progresses, whether the responses are having the 
expected effect on the project’s overall level of risk. 
 9.3.4 Tracking Compliance 
 In order to monitor the quality of the execution of the risk-related plans and processes, a set of quality 
metrics such as degree of variation from the baseline, should be tracked and recorded. These metrics will 
normally have been deﬁ ned in the risk management plan. 
 9.4 Documenting the Results of the Monitor and Control Risks Process 
 The ﬁ nal control action of risk monitoring and controlling is to record actual data for future use. This includes 
all of the relevant information relating to risk management from start to ﬁ nish of the project. The deﬁ nition of 
what this information must include, as well as the storage mechanism, should have been previously speciﬁ ed 
in the risk management plan. 
 The goal is to ensure that the signiﬁ cant risk management information is recorded to provide concrete data 
to the lessons learned process for inclusion in a lessons learned document, report, or other communication 
vehicle. Typical information includes the following: 
 For each identiﬁ ed risk or type of risk, whether it occurred, and, if so, when and how often. All 
• 
relevant data should be recorded: impact, effectiveness of detection and of response, and any 
unplanned, additional actions that were carried out. 
 Effectiveness of avoidance or exploitation actions. 
• 
 Effectiveness of transfer and sharing actions. 
• 
 Unexpected or undocumented risks which occurred and data about them. 
• 
 Effectiveness of risk mitigation and enhancement actions. 
• 
 Occurrence of accepted threats or opportunities. 
• 
 Consolidated information should be provided on the level of effort expended. Costs and beneﬁ ts to the 
project of risk management activities should also be provided. 
 This information will need to be archived and indexed in a manner that will facilitate retrieval for easy 
review during the project, at closure, and for future projects, when the need arises. 
57

A
 APPENDIX A 
 GUIDELINES FOR A PMI PRACTICE STANDARD 
 A.1  Introduction 
 A PMI practice standard is characterized as follows: 
  Each practice standard provides guidelines on the mechanics (e.g., nuts and bolts, basics, 
• 
fundamentals, step-by-step usage guide, how it operates, how to do it) of some signiﬁ cant process 
(input, tool, technique, or output) that is relevant to a project manager. 
  A practice standard does not necessarily mirror the life-cycle phases of many projects; however, an 
• 
individual practice standard may be applicable to the completion of one or more phases within a 
project. 
  A practice standard does not necessarily mirror the Knowledge Areas within  
• 
A Guide to the Project 
Management Body of Knowledge ( PMBOK ®  Guide –Fourth Edition), although an individual practice 
standard will provide sufﬁ cient detail and background for one or more of the inputs, tools and 
techniques, and/or outputs. Therefore, practice standards are not required to use the name of any 
Knowledge Area. 
  Each practice standard should include information on what the signiﬁ cant process is and does, 
• 
why it is signiﬁ cant, how to perform it, when it should be performed, and, if necessary for further 
clariﬁ cation, who should perform it. 
  Each practice standard should include information that is accepted and applicable for most projects 
• 
most of the time within the project management community. Processes that are generally restricted or 
applicable to one industry, country, or companion profession (i.e., an  application area ) may be included 
as an appendix for informational purposes, rather than as part of the practice standard. With strong 
support and evidence, an application area-speciﬁ c process may be considered as an extension practice 
standard, in the same manner as extensions to the  PMBOK ®  Guide –Fourth Edition are considered. 
  Each practice standard will beneﬁ t from the inclusion of examples and templates. It is best when an 
• 
example or template includes a discussion of its strengths and weaknesses. A background description 
may be necessary to put this discussion in the appropriate context. The examples should be aligned with 
the relevant information in the standard or its appendix and placed in proximity to that information. 
 All practice standards shall be written in the same general style and format. 
• 
 E ach practice standard project will be aligned with or reference other practice standards, as needed. 
• 
 Each practice standard will be consistent with the  
• 
PMBOK ®  Guide –Fourth Edition. 
 Each practice standard is intended to be more prescriptive than the  
• 
PMBOK ®  Guide –Fourth Edition.